## Chan Buddhism (9/30)

### Three main streams of Buddhism
- **Pali Scriptures (巴利三藏)**: (The basic Buddhism) Theravada (one of several schools collectively called Hinayana, "Lesser Vehicle", or 小乘佛教)
- **Sanskrit Scriptures**: Mahayana ("Greater Vehicle", or 大乘佛教) and Vajrayana ("Diamond Vehicle", 密宗, 金刚乘)
- **Chinese Buddhism** is part of 大乘佛教, includes āgama (阿含經).

### Indian Background
- Pre-Hindu "Brahmanical" religion: ancient Indian religion, developed from the Vedic religion (吠陀宗教) and influenced the later Hinduism.
- Social roles or Dharma (法，音译达摩) – proto-caste system, justified by [Vedas](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Vedas)
- Vedas: 吠陀（梵语：वेद），吠陀教最根本的教典。意思是“知识”、“启示”
- Priestly caste of Brahmans (婆羅門); perform animal sacrifice to gods, ritual hymns to gods.
- Upanishads ([奥义书](https://zh.wikipedia.org/wiki/%E5%A5%A5%E4%B9%89%E4%B9%A6)) are esoteric commentaries on the Vedas.

### Upanishads: Pantheistic Monism
Monism is the key. 
- All gods are, in reality, aspects of Brahman—the one universal reality that constitutes the substance of the world. Unity alone is real; we are all part of it. (Social castes are like different body parts of one body: Brahmans the head, Kshatriyas the arms, Vaishyas the trunk, and Shudras the feet.)
- Our own self (**atman**) is Brahman. "Thou art that." "Atman is Brahman." What I really am is the same as what you really are.
- However, this unity cannot be described; all descriptions are finite and differentiated. Differentiation is an illusion; unity is the truth. The goal is to return to oneness.

### Opposition Tradition: Shramanas (沙門)
At the same time, some people opted out of the Vedas system. They were called "Shramanas."
- Homeleavers: forest ascetics who reject the caste system, practice yogic austerities, seek religious liberation prior to old age.


- **Jains and Buddhists** are two of the most prominent groups. They share much in common, even overlapping terminology.
- **Jains**: Strict dualism of soul (Atman) and matter. The true self, like Atman, is completely separable from encumbrances in "karma"—sticky materiality generated by desires and actions, which bind the soul to samsara, the cycle of life and death. By absolute renunciation of desire and activity, the soul is freed from karma and liberated from samsara to experience "nirvana."
- **Yogic Practices**: Cultivation of a state of "abstraction", pulling away from sensory experience into the pure soul. These states are pre-Bhddisht and are called Dhyana. 禅那 then 禅。

Its about multiplicity, inpermanence..


### What is Dhyana for?
- for upanishads, sense experience and conceptual thoughts are diversity, illusion. Dhyana allows experience of the undifferentiated oneness of Brahman.
- Buddhists hajacked this technology to the purpose of mindfulness, observing pressent experience more closly and calmly and exactly in real time, in their impermanace,diversity suffering: for awareness **OF** experienced diversity. Why?
  
### The Buddha
- Worrier caste (not priestly caste)
- Sakyamuni
- Life: shiefled from all suffering old and and death (impernanance and suffeering). Four sight: sick man, old man, dead man, homeleaver (people leaving secular life to search for a solution to suffering). Full impact of what we take for granted: the scancdal and outrage of our fragility, mortality, and constant suscepibility to suffering.
  
The two extremes: 
- Life of pure pleasre. 
- practived extreme asceticism for 6 years. (the sacrifice of the senses)
- The soul is supposed to be eternal, to find the eternal soul, I need to clear away everything, even desires of food and the food itself. 
  
Give up 2 extremes:
  - rejects both the monism of the Upanishads and the dualism of the jains.
  - rejects both the self indulgence of the household  life and the self denial of the forest life. 
  - feeds his body, gives up ascetism becomes enlightened to the Middle Way, between extreme self-indulgence and self-torture.
- Middle" is philosophical. There is a way out of the two extremes, between being and non-being; between annhilationism and eternalism, ... The middle way is everything: also for sameness and difference. For desire and non-desire. 
- Key insight: dependent co-arising. 缘起。
  - what ever exists arises due to MULTIPLE causes leading to multiple effects
  - Not one cause-one effect (linear causality), nor one cause manyt effects (God), nor many causes-one effect (satisfaction)

Why is tehre no one single creator: because it is one cause many effects. 

Many causes to one effect: -> the three marks
- all conditioned things are suffering (because there can never be a single effect not contravened by contrary effects) 苦
- all conditioned things are impermenent 无常 (becasue no cause acting alone can guarantee a contutued production of any given effect)
  - a cup is a cup now does not mean it will be a cup. Even for a thing to characteristic, even, reuires it to be a cause of it.Permenance requires something to be a cause of it. 
- all things, conditioned or otherwise, are not-self (无我) (a self woudl generally be a geneiune agent, the doer of my deeds, a single cause which alone could produce effects: free will, etc. Seeking the buddha nature can be the very worst thing you can do.)
- I moved a cup, am I alone responsible for it? Buddist says no. It just that your attention is narrowed. A true self: I can unilaterally do anything to myself - be tall, be short, be ...

Four noble truths
- The suffering of suffering 苦苦
- suffering of decay 坏苦 (pleasure since impermenant is always permeated by the impending loss of pleasure which is suffering)
- suffering is conditionarlity: I am not in control, NO ISNGLE CAUSE is in control, the fact o helplessness and fragikity itself, covering pain, pleasure and neutral suscetibility of sensation itself. 行苦

from radical world denial -> to radical world acceptance

### Rafts and Arrow
- Strict phenominalism. raft and arrow parables: suffering and the end of suffering.
- Raft: raft cross the river, do you want to carry the raft or not after crossing. You don't need to since you have already crossed the river.


### Desire:
 - second noble truth
 - attachment to desire is the cause of all this suffering
 - Not desire or pleasire otself, as in Jainsm, but attachment. Requiring the repetition of previous pleasure. But the experience is phenomenological, it is not actually repeatable.
- Desire for 
  - repeated pleasure
  - for existence (to be this or that)
  - for non-exsistence (not be something or not be nothing at all: suicide)
  
The desire for a preconceived thing is really a desire for thePOWER to obtain that thing, not a desre for the thing itself. The King midas example. What we want is the power over experience. Self = unconditional power. 

The vicious circle of ignorance karma suffering ignorance karma, ... (c.f., the desire to control exprience, becasue i think I have free will, but that is because I have narrowed my attention, then I got habituated to my seemingly existed power to control, then I need to increasingly narrow my attention,....)

Against the idea of comparing oneself to others,... follows from the epistemology of Buddhism.

### Karma
Buddha accepts Jain's notios of karma, nirvana samsara, arhat, liberatuion, etc. but redefines them.

Karma: There is no sould,. action, intended action, and ramification thereof, is karma. 

everything has a cause and effect, but becasue of multiple cause and multiple effect, you can never say something will go one wway, the experience not copyable. 

Upanishads: All is God
Jains: ALl is Soul
Buddhusts: No soul, No God
giwveerm there is karma=action, and there is contnuity, and there is "rebirth" not reincarnation. Not a sould that is reborn into another body, bjt like a wave which is always changing, same process moment to moment as life to life. Why should I care about myself tomorrow? Bhudda says neither same nor a different guy. 

### Third noble truth
An end of suffering is possible.  Nirvana. Unconditionality. Nothing can be said about it 

Suffering is always conditioned, e.g., desire.

meditate is designed to separate the mental and the physical. But here it is used in another way. There is no sould or god, you get a particular mind of focus, to see clearly, not to see the eternal, but the inpermanent you are ignoring. To see the impermenent. unlike the original meditation, here, you still want to keep an awareness of the physical thing. 